[Skip banner]
[Home][Sources][How Do I?][Overview][Help]

[Return To Search Form][FOCUS][printdoc][emaildoc]
Search Terms: haiku, Cho

[Document List][Expanded List][KWIC][FULL format currently displayed]

                       Document 1 of 18. [Next Document]

                   Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                         Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

                     April 1, 2001 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: CUE; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 2533 words

HEADLINE: Haiku casts big Net;
An old and clever form of Japanese poetry is making a global splash

BYLINE: JIM HIGGINS of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:
An ancient pond

A frog jumps in

A sound heard 'round the world

Haiku, Japan's centuries-old traditional poetry, has evolved into an
international passion.

Thanks in part to the global reach of the Internet and the increasing
dominance of English as a world language, haiku that might have been shared
only through letters between distant friends or seen in tiny- circulation
journals can now be read by anyone who can open a Web browser.

Between what he discovers himself and what he's invited to list, veteran
poet, editor and critic William J. Higginson is adding new sites every week
to the Open Directory Project's haiku-related pages.

Haiku activity is growing in the United States and Canada, and really
burgeoning in Europe -- not only Western Europe but Eastern Europe, too,
even in the Balkans, where warfare has left some people electrically
challenged, Higginson said in a phone interview from his New Mexico home.

"The Internet is drawing people into physical togetherness as well," by
encouraging more face-to-face meetings and group get-togethers, said Randy
Brooks, director of the creative writing major at Millikin University in
Decatur, Ill., and a haiku poet and publisher. And publications that began
as online magazines have evolved into print journals, such as Acorn
(home.earthlink.net/=missias/Acorn.html).

Big names are picking up the haiku pen, too.

Former U.S. Poet Laureate Robert Hass has translated the classic Japanese
masters Basho, Buson and Issa. Prominent Irish poet Paul Muldoon wrote an
extended sequence of "Hopewell Haiku," named after the New Jersey town where
he was living (though his haiku rhyme, a no-no among purists). Even outlaw
country-rock singer Steve Earle has committed himself to writing a haiku a
day as a "spiritual and literary discipline."

With free verse having been the dominant mode of poetry for decades now,
haiku may be the one example of formal poetry many people would still
recognize on sight. Your letter carrier or phlebotomist might be hard-
pressed to identify a sonnet or terza rima, but show her Basho's famous
verse:

The old pond

A frog jumps in --

The sound of the water

and she'll know it's haiku.

With April being National Poetry Month, it's an opportune time to consider
the ripples in the frog pond.

Haiku evolved in 17th century Japan out of earlier poetic forms. Masters
such as Matsuo Basho (1644-1694), Yosa Buson (1716-1784) and Kobayashi Issa
(1762-1826) made it a national Japanese practice.

A haiku is a short poem "in which Nature is linked to human nature,"
according to a Haiku Society of America definition.

Haiku's brevity isn't the only reason why the form is a good fit for the
Internet Age, Brooks said.

"It's an art that depends on reader response," he said. "A haiku is never
said to be born until a reader finishes it in their own imagination."

Brooks calls that haiku's postmodern quality: The art isn't in the
possession of the writer, but in the interaction of the writer and reader.

While a few pioneers, notably Ezra Pound and the Imagist poets, produced
haiku-like poems early in the 20th century, the form's arrival in English-
speaking countries is largely a byproduct of the end of World War II.

After the war ended, Higginson notes in "The Haiku Handbook" (Kodansha
International paperback, $14), R.H. Blyth, a British POW who'd been held in
a Japanese internment camp, and Harold G. Henderson, an American military
man, began to evangelize about haiku in the West.

Blyth's four-volume edition of haiku masters and related philosophy
attracted the attention of Beat writers such as Gary Snyder, Allen Ginsberg
and Jack Kerouac. Kerouac gave the form a double boost: first through his
thinly disguised portrayal of Snyder in his novel "The Dharma Bums," then by
writing his own haiku:

In my medicine cabinet,

the winter fly

has died of old age.

Just as many contemporary haiku poets do, Kerouac rejected the notion that
haiku in English had to be 17 syllables.

Robert Spiess of Middleton began reading English translations of Japanese
masters such as Basho and Issa when they started appearing in 1940s.

"They just grabbed me," he said in a telephone interview, citing their
simplicity and their ability to comprehend the interrelatedness of life.

Spiess began writing and, in 1977, assumed editorship of Modern Haiku, the
oldest continuously publishing English- language haiku magazine. He still
edits the magazine today.

In the popular " The Haiku Anthology" (Norton paperback, $15.95), editor Cor
van den Heuvel writes that many of Spiess' haiku "reflect his love of
canoeing the lakes and streams of Wisconsin."

The chain saw stops;

deeper in the winter woods

a chickadee calls

As an editor, Spiess has been an important apostle for haiku in America.
Just ask Mark Alan Osterhaus, who met Spiess in a haiku- friendly way: They
both liked to watch the sunset over Lake Mendota in Madison.

Osterhaus was a University of Wisconsin-Madison student then. Spiess shared
some issues of Modern Haiku with him and nurtured the younger man's early
writing.

"He helped me understand what the art form was all about," Osterhaus said in
a telephone interview.

Today, Osterhaus runs Out of the Box Publishing, his Madison-based games
business. But he still writes and publishes haiku, and maintains a
comprehensive, frequently updated collection of haiku links
(www.execpc.com/=ohaus/haiklink.htm). Spiess "has mentored many people to a
higher quality of art," said Brooks at Millikin University. Brooks also
joked that Spiess is an old-fashioned editor who still uses a manual
typewriter with a few blobby keys.

In recognition of his service to the haiku world, Spiess shared the Shiki
Masaoka International Haiku Prize in September with a Chinese researcher and
a Belgian scholar. At age 78, he made his first trip to Japan.

As an editor who looks at thousands of haiku submissions each year, he's
bullish about their quality.

"People have gotten away from the very early days of the pseudo-Japanese
concept or expression," Spiess said. "They are generally less sentimental
and pretty- pretty."

But as international as haiku has become, Spiess believes the best haiku
come from people writing about their own backyards. They achieve more depth,
he says, than "travel haiku" or "vacation haiku" that merely record stimuli.

SPAM-ku

The Internet has also brought the noise as well as the content, unleashing a
torrent of humor, satire and zaniness all labeled haiku.

The biggest brand name is SPAM-ku (pemtropics.mit.edu/=jcho/spam). MIT
researcher John Cho launched the site in praise of the processed-pork meat
in 1995; to date, it has spawned more than 17,000 verses by more than 40
contributors, as well as a greatest-hits book, "SPAM-ku: Tranquil
Reflections on Luncheon Loaf" (Harperperennial paperback, $7.95).

Here's a slice:

Mars, the red planet,

contrary to old beliefs,

is covered with SPAM.

-- Ohio-Gremlin

Then there's Presidential Haiku (haiku575.blogspot.com), Louisville
Courier-Journal columnist Thomas Nord's assemblage of 17-syllable poems
about our nation's leaders, which achieve a certain historical pith:

Theodore Roosevelt

Speech in Milwaukee

Shot! But kept right on talking

Bull Moose? No kidding!

Nord needs a title to make his haiku work; generally, though, both serious
and funny ones are left untitled.

Sniffing the interactive possibilities, both Salon and Slate, the popular
online magazines, have jumped into the haiku pond.

Last September, Slate football columnist Gregg Easterbrook invited readers
to send poems in response to a trivia contest. When one sent a haiku,
Easterbrook encouraged more, reminded readers of the form with a few samples
of his own:

On Brett Favre's helmet

Beer falls, and the cup crumbles

Sideline in autumn

From that point on, Easterbrook included a Haiku Corner in most of his
weekly columns, mixing his own creations with reader submissions:

Pity Dick Jauron

Bears Shane and Cade throwing bad

Jim Miller much missed.

-- Steve Gozdecki

As for Salon, its popular Haiku Error Message entries (www.salon.
com/21st/chal/1998/02/10chal2.html) have enjoyed a healthy afterlife on the
Web. Here's David Dixon's winner:

Three things are certain:

Death, taxes, and lost data.

Guess which has occurred.

But the oddest pseudo-ku on the Web isn't humor, but an act of social
commentary and subversion.

In February, an anonymous author uploaded to the Internet the DeCSS Haiku,
which Carnegie- Mellon University computer scientist David S. Touretzky
called an "ingenious poem (that) is both a commentary on the DeCSS situation
and a correct and complete description of the descrambling algorithm."
Hundreds of stanzas long, it includes instructions for reading encrypted
DVDs. Here's a section of its opening:

And all mathematics

is full of stories (just read

Eric Temple Bell);

and CSS is

no exception to this rule.

Sing, Muse, decryption

once secret, as all

knowledge, once unknown: how to

decrypt DVDs.

The entertainment industry has sued several people over various attempts to
publish the source code for decrypting DVDs. Touretzky maintains that source
code is a form of communication and protected free speech. The DeCSS Haiku
can be found online at his Gallery of DeCSS Descramblers (www.cs.cmu.
edu/=dst/DeCSS/Gallery/).

The popularity of pseudo-haiku causes varying degrees of vexation for
serious haiku poets.

"SPAM haiku and automated haiku demean and diminish what haiku is all
about," said Osterhaus.

But Higginson takes a more philosophical view. Many haiku purists dislike
SPAM-ku, but he argues that these forms of humor could easily lead people to
look a little deeper into the real stuff.

Higginson also sees Internet activity helping to create new forms.

"I'm very pleased with scifaiku," he said, referring to
science-fiction-oriented haiku (www.scifaiku.com). "(The people writing it)
understand the Japanese tradition. They're writing good poems."

The future of haiku

The humorous haiku and the DeCSS Haiku have one thing in common: They're
written as three lines of five, seven and five syllables, adhering to what's
commonly thought of as haiku form.

But serious contemporary haiku poets don't see 5-7-5 as essential. The
Japanese language is different than English: 17 syllables in Japanese is
really like 12 or so syllables in English, the argument runs.

Haiku poets in English also have experimented with one-line poems, two-line
poems and other variations. Marlene Mountain, for example, has a large
selection of her one-line haiku at www.hardtofind.
org/hardtofind/marlenemountain/contents.html.

It may surprise newbies stuck on three lines when they learn that classical
Japanese haiku were often executed in a single line.

Haiku is associated with nature, but poets are writing urban haiku, too.
Consider this example from the late Nick Virgilo:

New Year's Eve:

pay phone receiver

dangling

Editors often distinguish between haiku and senryu, poems about human
relationships in the same form, often satiric or humorous, such as this one
by George Swede from "The Haiku Anthology":

One button undone

in the clerk's blouse -- I let her

steal my change

At September's World Haiku Conference in Tolmin, Slovenia, Japanese writer
Susumu Takiguchi noted that "Japanese poets increasingly embrace
international haiku, and even Japanese haiku societies are coming to
recognize the value, importance and necessity of working in a larger
sphere."

The rest of the world continues to adopt, and adapt, traditions from Japan,
too. People in the New Zealand town of Kati Kati have chiseled haiku on
boulders along a river walkway, echoing the Japanese practice of engraving
haiku on small stones.

In the U.S., American haiku scholars and poets keep delving deeper into
haiku's related traditions. For example, Higginson is working on a
three-year project with the University of Virginia's Japanese Text
Initiative (etext.lib.virginia.edu/japanese/) to translate an entire
saijiki, a kind of seasonal almanac that lists kigo, allusion-rich seasonal
words, and then demonstrates their use in one or more haiku.

A.C. Missias, a Philadelphia poet who edits Acorn, continues to be thrilled
by quality of submissions she receives and the personal connections she
makes through haiku.

"A lot of people find that haiku becomes an outlet or a way of getting quiet
in a busy day," she said. "That's why it's become a hobby for a wide range
of people."

Where to find more in burgeoning world of haiku

META HAIKU

The Haiku Society of America, www.hsa-haiku.org. News, membership and
contest information.

"Links to Haiku Sites," www.execpc.com/=ohaus/haiklink. htm. Mark Alan
Osterhaus of Madison's comprehensive collection of links includes many home
pages of active haiku poets.

Open Directory Project's list of haiku links,
dmoz.org/Arts/Literature/Poetry/PoeticForms/HaikuandRelatedForms/. Poet and
scholar William J. Higginson updates this collection regularly.

"Some Haiku Book Reviews," www.scifaiku.com/haiku/haiku-books. html. Tom
Brinck provides extensive capsule reviews of anthologies and related books.

"History of Haiku," www.big.or.jp/=loupe/links/ehisto/ehisinx. shtml.
Samples of Japanese masters and brief essays about them, from the legendary
Basho to the late 20th century.

English-Language Haiku on the Web, www.family-net.net/=brooksbooks/.
Poet-publisher Randy Brooks' collection of links and online publications.

ONLINE PUBLICATIONS

"Contemporary Haiku: Origins and New Directions,"
webdelsol.com/Perihelion/acmarticle.htm. An intelligent essay by
Philadelphia poet A.C. Missias with plenty of examples.

The Heron's Nest, www.theheronsnest.com/. A monthly online haiku magazine.

Temps Libres/Free Times, web.wanadoo.be/tempslibres/. A multilingual reading
room of contemporary haiku.

Tinywords.com, www.tinywords.com. One haiku delivered daily. Read it online,
or sign up for e-mail delivery (messages are short enough to receive on a
mobile phone).

"Those Women Writing Haiku" by Jane Reichhold, www.ahapoetry.com/twwhbk.htm.
An online historical book about women who've written haiku (and its
predecessors) from ancient Japan to contemporary America and Europe, with
several interpolated anthologies of poems.

AHA Books Online, www.ahapoetry.com/onlinebk.htm. Multiple collections of
haiku, tanka and other short-form poems.

Snapshots, www.mccoy.co.uk/snapshots/. Attractive British haiku magazine
with a distinctive Web-friendly format.

Haijinx, www.haijinx.com/. A new magazine that stresses the role of humor in
haiku.

HAIKU HUMOR

SPAM Haiku Archive, pemtropics.mit.edu/=jcho/spam. John Cho's collection of
more than 17,000 little poems about the legendary lunch meat.

"Presidential Haiku," haiku575. blogspot.com. From George Washington to
George W. Bush, each gets his 17 syllables, some many times over.

Haiku Movie Reviews, www.igs.net/=mtr/haiku- reviews/. One of several
Internet sites offering three-line movie reviews.

Pop Update Poetry, www.popupdate.com. Overheard cubicle talk and withering
sarcasm blended into a haiku-like format.

-- Jim Higgins

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001

                       Document 1 of 18. [Next Document]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

[FOCUS]

Search Terms: haiku, Cho
To narrow your search, please enter a word or phrase:


[About LEXIS-NEXIS® Academic Universe] [Terms and Conditions] [Top of Page]
 Copyright © 2001, LEXIS-NEXIS®, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc. All Rights
                                 Reserved.
